Notes from Network working group call, August 10 (#3604)
tock/tock: doc/wg/network/notes/network-notes-2023-08-10.md

# Tock Network Notes 2023-08-10

## Attendees
 * Branden Ghena
 * Alexandru Radovici
 * Felix Mada
 * Leon Schuermann
 * Cristian Rusu
 * Tyler Potyondy

# Introduction
 * Alex: First meeting! Goal to define how networking is going to work in Tock. Round of introductions first!
 * Felix: Working at OxidOS, mainly on CAN bus. Started with Tock a couple of months ago. Worked on embedded for four-five years.
 * Leon: PhD student at Princeton working with Amit Levy. Working on Tock for five years. Funny enough my first real project was an Ethernet driver for Tock. Still in progress...
 * Tyler: Master's student at UC San Diego working with Pat Pannuto. Only involved in Tock for a few months. Working on adding support for Thread networking: 802.15.4, 6lowpan, UDP, etc.

>  * Cristian: I teach at Bucharest. Background in wireless communication: 5G stuff. I'm here because I know about Tock and networking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Cristian: I teach at University of Bucharest. Background in wireless communication: 5G stuff. I'm here because I know about Tock and networking.
```

>  * Alex: Professor at Polytechnic university in Bucharest. Started on Tock in 2020, interested in Rust OS for teaching. Still interested in network communication for teaching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 * Alex: Professor at Polytechnic University in Bucharest. Started on Tock in 2020, interested in Rust OS for teaching. Still interested in network communication for teaching.
```

 * Branden: I vote for that for next meeting
 * Branden: How do we handle agenda? Should we send a notification in advance, or start the call with agenda. Or end with agenda?
 * Leon: We can play this loose. I do like having the call for items as a reminder
 * Branden: Is sending out the agenda reminder on Slack fine?
 * Alex: We'll need to make sure everyone is on it
 * Alex: What about drawings? Need some collaborative platform for that.
 * Tyler: Generally in Tock, the documentation in terms of diagrams is pretty lacking in Tock. I think a great goal would be to ensure that we create visual documentation as part of our working group.
 * Alex: I used draw.io in the past
 * Branden: Alex has an ACTION ITEM to figure out a drawing platform

# Working Group PR
 * Branden: https://github.com/tock/tock/pull/3578 needs two more small edits before merging
 * Alex: I will update that tonight
 * Branden: We can merge tomorrow on the core team call

# Overview of Network Stacks
 * Leon: Would be good to do a recap of what people on this call have worked on. Then we could have visualizations of those for next week.
 * Alex: CAN, Ethernet, Thread all seem in progress

## Ethernet

>  * Leon: Trying to start with Ethernet. Been working on this for a long time. We have discussed at several past meetings of Tock groups. We specifically chose Ethernet as an example because it's one of the simplest transports to integrate with existing IP networks. Back in 2022 we didn't have any layer2 transport implementation. Over the last year we have written three proper implementations of Ethernet MAC layer. They differ in feature set, APIs, buffer management. So a key takeaway now is defining higher-level interfaces and going above layer2 in the OSI stack. IP layer, UDP transport, ultimately UDP/TCP based applications. We have a work-in-progress branch in Tock and Libtock-C where the Tock kernel has a Ethernet TAP driver (TAP/TUN from BSD Linux) which is a driver which forwards Ethernet layer2 to userspace and back. And we have userspace libraries to implement IP: LWIC. We're at the stage in the work-in-progress environment where we can share a small HTTP webpage. At Tockworld 2022 we had decided to start with Ethernet layer2. It's a great place to start, but definitely not what we want in the long run.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Leon: Trying to start with Ethernet. Been working on this for a long time. We have discussed at several past meetings of Tock groups. We specifically chose Ethernet as an example because it's one of the simplest transports to integrate with existing IP networks. Back in 2022 we didn't have any layer2 transport implementation. Over the last year we have written three proper implementations of Ethernet MAC layer. They differ in feature set, APIs, buffer management. So a key takeaway now is defining higher-level interfaces and going above layer2 in the OSI stack. IP layer, UDP transport, ultimately UDP/TCP based applications. We have a work-in-progress branch in Tock and Libtock-C where the Tock kernel has a Ethernet TAP driver (TAP/TUN from BSD Linux) which is a driver which forwards Ethernet layer2 to userspace and back. And we have userspace libraries to implement IP: LwIP and `smoltcp`. We're at the stage in the work-in-progress environment where we can share a small HTTP webpage. At Tockworld 2022 we had decided to start with Ethernet layer2. It's a great place to start, but definitely not what we want in the long run.
```

Reviewer 2: For me, GitHub fails to highlight the diff here. I propose changing "LWIC" to "LwIP and `smoltcp`".

 * Branden: So we have three implementations?
 * Leon: We do have three entirely different Ethernet implementations. STM32F4 series by Alex's student Cristian. Lite-ETH for FPGA by Leon. VirtIO QEMU device by Leon. Fundamentally different.
 * Branden: Something I'm interested in is how they compare/contrast. Topic for a future meeting.
 * Alex: We have the same TAP driver implemented for each?
 * Leon: The drivers all use the same HIL to interface with the TAP driver.
 * Branden: Oh wow. So all three of these fit with the same interface.

>  * Leon: Amit has been working on Ethernet stuff. He has some form of Ethernet-over-USB, which presents the Tock board as an Ethernet device when attached over USB. He has some very crude IP and TCP stacks in the kernel, mostly for his own testing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 * Leon: Amit has been working on Ethernet stuff. He has some form of Ethernet-over-USB (USB CDC-EEM), which presents the Tock board as an Ethernet device when attached over USB. I believe he has some "rudimentary" IP and TCP stacks in the kernel, mostly for his own testing.
```

Gotta make sure I'm quoting people correctly. :smile:

 * Felix: Yes, sort of. In AUTOSAR there is some logic. Certain signals correspond to certain collections of bits.
 * Leon: So a question from Tockworld I had was how to make an interface to bridge protocols. So I'm interested here
 * Alex: I think in cars they use mostly UDP. So they take the frame from CAN and drop it in a UDP frame. Then they just need to add retransmission, for some types of packets, others they don't care if they lose.
 * Branden: Do you have support for large packet types?
 * Felix: Not at this time, although we can fragment across small packets

## LoRa
 * Branden: The existing LoRa support in Tock is entirely Alistair's effort, but I'll say some things on it. LoRa is long-range wireless (kilometer range) while still at low energy and at low bitrate (kbps). There only exists really one family of chips for LoRa communication, which are usually communicated with over SPI. So Alistair's efforts connect a raw SPI interface to userland, and there are C libraries to drive the LoRa radios over SPI. This would usually have problems with timing, but LoRa is very slow, with a full second between reception and an ACK, for instance. So this works.

>  * Alex: A LoRa gateway could be an interesting connection of networks here: LoRa + Ethernet

Reviewer 3: I wanted to jump in and say I don't think Tock is a good fit for a LoRa gateway. Gateways tend to be pretty big systems, it really is job for Linux on a RaspberryPi at a minimum.

Tock for P2P LoRa and even LoRaWAN devices I think is a really cool usecase. There are pretty large projects like [Meshtastic](https://meshtastic.org/) using LoRa P2P, so it's very handy.

RadioLib (which is the userspace application) [supports LoRaWAN](https://github.com/jgromes/RadioLib/blob/master/examples/LoRaWAN/LoRaWAN_End_Device/LoRaWAN_End_Device.ino). So I'm hoping to support Tock devices as LoRaWAN clients. Then we can have smart Tock sensors transmitting data to TTN!

I already have [an example](https://www.alistair23.me/2023/08/09/lora-on-sparkfun-board/) of transmitting sensor data between Tock instances up and running

Author: Thanks for sharing this. I use RadioLib for my classes and it's a really high-quality project. I didn't know they had added LoRaWAN support. And the Tock support you added to it is fantastic!!
